My mother and father were very friendly with Peg and Dave.
And they were related to Peg. I think one of them was related to Peg.
But anyway, they were very friendly and lived in Odfellow Street, Peg and Dave.
Williams, Dave Williams.
And he, at the time, of course they got to know Joe, obviously being intellectual as well.
And Peg was invited by Katriona to go up to the Isle of Skye.
For a week, I'm not sure how long.
Anyway, up they went and Peg said,
Well, what are we doing here? Well, we're going to have a dinner tonight.
He said, you'll meet all the krachach, she said, of the Isle of Skye.
So they sat at the table and Peg didn't say much of anything.
She didn't know them. And Katriona started saying,
What a wonderful bathroom Peg had.
And all mother of pearl and all. It was an exquisite bathroom.
And Peg just looked. She couldn't believe this because she didn't have a bathroom.
Didn't have a bathroom.
Things like that happened all through.
Peg enjoyed the luxury up there. Of course, servants bringing breakfast in bed and all that.
Anyway, back they came.
And after that it was a man in a rug.
Oh, my mother used to go there regularly.
Two Pegs in Odfellow Street now, this was.
And she looked at the half rug and she said,
It's a bit chubby, Peg. Yes, it is, Peg said.
We're going to Swansea on Saturday and we're going to buy a new one.
And my mother said, Oh, good. I'm looking forward to that.
So my mother was very pleased that they were good. And she told my father, oh.
So she went back in about a week or so and called in Pegs.
And she said, Well, seeing the old one still there, she said, Well, where is it?
And Peg said, up there on the bookshelf. Four books.
That's what they'd gone to town.
And Dave couldn't resist them, she said. Had to have his books.
Yes, the books are more important.
So it shows how well he spent his money.
He spent his money wisely.
Yes, he was a wrecking weight.
And then I knew Peg was working for, I think, the local Labour Party.
She was writing a lot of stuff for them at the time, you know, same time.
And then, of course, Dave had a job in London with the NCB.
So he accepted that. And off they went to London for a while.
I'm not sure how long, but it was the time when this smog, they called it,
was in London. She was a killer, really.
But they were there because my mother and father went to, for a weekend, I think, to stay with them.
And yes, Peg and Dave were very intellectual.
Do you remember Joseph's visit to the Royal Academy?
Oh, yes.
He was, that was late in his lifetime, really, that he was accepted by the Royal Academy and delighted, of course.
And they all went up for a meeting. I don't know whether Peg and Dave went, but Dave went, I think.
And my father passed away then, I think. So it was a bit later than that, again, 1960, more like 1970, 1980, is it?
So a bit further on down the road.
It was the visit to Katriona's brother's party. He was a politician.
Oh.
And Joe had to go up to this big dinner party.
Oh, that's right, yes.
Oh, he came over and he said to my father, I've been invited, Katriona and I have been invited to this political dinner.
Would you believe it? I didn't think much of that.
And my father said, oh, that's nice, Joe. What will you wear?
He said, as I am, painting clothes, spattered with oil paints, trousers and everything. And I'll go as I am.
Well, my father said, I've got a dinner jacket you can borrow. Oh, no, no, I'll go as I am. They like me or they won't like me.
So what happened was that Katriona's brother from the yellow sky had been appointed a liberal candidate for some constituency.
And that was, the dinner was in his honour. So when they came back, Joe came over and, well, how did it go?
Oh, grand, he said, very good. Were you embarrassed at all?
My father thought going in compared to all these people in the evening talks.
So he didn't change his mind? He went adamant in his painting clothes?
No, he didn't. No, he went as he was. And he said, no, they were embarrassed. Not me.
I always remember that. I was there.
So he was very strong, strong-willed. Yes. And he was more of a, take me as who I am. He wouldn't posh.
No, no, he wouldn't. No. He was like that. But I don't know what you'd call it, really.
But he was, no, no, he refused everything my father could offer. Well, only a jacket he could offer him anyway.
My father didn't go, no one did in those days very much. And no, were you embarrassed? No, they were.
What are your memories of Joe sketching around the Strygon Lice? Was he often out with a pencil and paper sketching?
Occasionally. Occasionally. But of course he had done that in the initial, early days, I think.
So he did that earlier on in his time in the Strygon Lice? Yes, yes. But he went further afield, of course with my father, you know.
And sketching and with friends. And I think that was his, he was more concentrating on going underground, painting the colliers underground.
And my father took a photograph. My father was used to going down. And I think it was on his schedule in Colliery.
And it was a very deep mine. So he would, the lift, you know, go right down. So he took Joe there sketching the colliers underground.
And he'd built up this friendship with them then. Yes. Yes, he liked them very much.
And as you say, he was very interested in the working man and painting him. But he got on very well with your father too.
Oh yes. So he was very much involved with the family coming round every day. Yes. For Eastkick. Yes.
And your daughter Carol. Oh yes. She was small at the time. So she was a little child at the time. Yes.
And she was always under the table. You know the plush clothes with the fringe. Yes.
And Carol was always under the table and we had to call her out and offer her a biscuit or something before she'd come.
And then Joe came in. And then he saw she put, she knew there was a different voice and different accent you see.
So she pulled up the fringe that. And then when she saw him, she was all smiles. And he was talking to her and lifting her up onto his lap then.
Oh nice. So he was obviously part of the family a lot then. Yes.
Of course I was at an awkward age was I. You know. My twenties. Yes.
Did he sketch, paint any of the family? No he didn't. Did he cater any of the family? Did he take any of the family out?
No he didn't. No he didn't actually. I don't know whether Joe's. Wendy. This one. Oh that's the one is it? Yes.
Yes and that one. Did you still go sketching? My father sketched as well. So perhaps he thought you know it was a bit awkward.
I don't know. But he never wanted to even, any one of us really.
So the family had some sort of creative-ness about them. So obviously Joseph obviously felt a kinship with your family.
Yes. Well I don't know. He was, I think he wanted a children didn't he? Very much. And the fact that he married again and had the children, I think he was very happy.
And Katriona it was some illness that really took the baby. She lost her baby, the first baby then. Well the final one for all I know.
And their parents came down and they, first of all they weren't very keen on having Joe as a son-in-law. Because he wasn't very well off you see.
But then they gradually, when Katriona lost the baby they came down, the mother and father, and they made up, do you remember seeing them? No.
I didn't see them. I think a short visit I think it was. What were the favourite places that Joe enjoyed to go to in the Stugan light? You said about the cafe and the cinema.
What other places did he enjoy to go into? Jim's shop. Oh yes he loved Jim's shop. Who was Jim? Jim and the Skedwin Arms is here. Directly across is a little shop.
I think now they're selling pet food. Yes. And everyone liked Jim. But Jim was a real socialist you know. More of a communist really. So whether they had that in common I don't know.
I don't really know. Can you tell us more about that side of Stugan light? Part of Stugan light was called the Red Square. My father was a socialist. But he wasn't, I don't know, but a communist.
But I know Jim was because he used to have letters. Jim Lewis, the Kremlin, Red Square, Moscow. And he'd receive the letters. And oh just a laugh in those days.
But I don't know how many were that way inclined. But socialism was big wasn't it? The Labour Party. Dialic was a communist. Oh there was yes.
Yes. Can you tell us a bit more about that? No my father was a socialist and that was it. But communism was creeping in. And there were a crowd of people who were very interested in the Russian left group you know.
And they went to live in the Ernest as I say a little community. I don't know whether you've ever heard of it. And very small. It grew of course. And when my father came out of university that's what he set up was the ILP, Independent Labour Party.
And my mother made 200 red ties. Sold them for the boys who were members. And they had dances. They held dances in a hall. I think it was behind the present co-operative stores in Ustrad.
Behind there. There was a big hall. And they had dances every Wednesday I think it was. And my mother said my father couldn't dance very well. But she made all these ties for the boys. It was quite creeping in I think.
I think definitely the communist side. That's of course the ILP had been going for years in Ustrad. And the valley. When we came to live here we met a few of the boys who were members.
Was Joe still in Ustrad and Leis then? We came here in 1960. No. He just left. 58. Yes. Just left. We'd have approved of that.
What about Joan Littlewood? Oh yes. Joan Littlewood came. So many well known people came to lecture and perform in the welfare hall. Joan Littlewood was one. She had been in London.
She was very big. You know. Well known. I think it was the Oh What a Lovely War. That was the one. Joan Littlewood. She was very good. And she came and we were sitting in the audience expecting the curtain to open.
They came in from the side. The two little actors. They came in and we were surprised that that was a novelty really. Obviously seemed to be quite a very active place. It was. Because we had the cinema, we had the welfare hall for dances and everything. And the church hall. So we were well blest really.
So throughout the year there were events that everyone could join in with. This is a constant annual. Yes. From Christmas to Easter to parades. We had the carnival of course. The monkey parade. I'd like to know more about that. My grandmother used to talk about the monkey parade.
That was a Sunday event. Can you tell me the origins of the monkey parade? No. I know that reading in the paper that there were only two towns or districts still holding a monkey parade. That was in Yorkshire. In York itself I think. York itself. And Estragonas. And Slavera rather. Slavera it was. There was nothing in Estragonas of monkey parades.
And we'd go on a Sunday after church. Our chapel. And everybody over 15 or 16 would go to the wood house. The road house. The road house. And what would you do there? And we went in there and we had an ice cream each. And then chatting. And then we'd start walking then down to the cinema.
And the boys would be waiting. And if you were lucky you would be asked to be escorted home. But if you weren't you would have to jump on the bus and penny ride home. So we always had to keep the penny in case we didn't strike lucky.
So there were boys and girls socialising in one place? Yes. After the chapel did you say? The younger generation. Oh yes. I think most of them were. Well then the war came of course. And most of them went. The boys went.
I don't know whether the monkey parade. Because I was married then of course. And I don't know whether they kept on with the monkey parade after that. But it petered out anyway didn't it? Didn't last very long after that.
Are there any going in Swansea? No funnily enough but my grandmother, my mamgie, always used to talk about the monkey parade. The Morriston monkeys. On an evening going up and down Woodfield Street. Boys on one side, girls on the other. But I believe it was like what was the called? Monkey parade.
Well we did it in Pontetower. Up and down. After we went to chapel and then Rangosis, the Italian cafe. And then we'd walk up one side and the boys on the other side. It was like a parade. How did you know you were meant to do that? I don't know. A tradition.
A tradition. For years it was going. And down here it was on the parade ground where the trees are. The avenue. And Nostra Gunlas from the capital cinema to the empire cinema. Up and down. Up and down all the time. Until you decided well, let's jump on the bus and go home.
So you had to wait in case a young lad went to hold your hand or to walk you home. Excellent. Yes, well they were very polite and everything was nice. Different because we could afford one ice cream. My friend Esme, she wouldn't take an ice cream, she'd have a cigarette.
And my friend Esme, she used to tell her, if you didn't smoke you could have one of these. It didn't make any difference. And she met two boys from, she thought they were from Oxford, they were from Oxford. So she thought Oxford University. Oh dear.
But it had happened that they were Cullum Training College outside Oxford. But she still carried on with this trooper, he was a Yorkshire boy, and he went to the Air Force and was killed in the Battle of Bresin in the early days of the war.
But you had so many dances in the week, so many dances in the welfare and the church hall.
Well, fair and the money. Church hall is a stretch on a Wednesday, and if you could afford it, once a month perhaps down in the rink here. That was very expensive because you had to hire a car, you know, to come back, town and back.
And Mr Griffiths had a beautiful car, Ford, I don't know, it was a special car anyway.
Not a Charabont?
No, no, it was just a big car, you know, but a very luxurious car. And he used to charge us ninepence each to go to and down the valley.
A bit like a taxi.
Yes, yes, that's right. So, we were so lucky to have a cinema and three dance halls if you wanted them.
And what kind of music were played at the dances?
Oh, modern up-to-date music. Everett Davies and his broadcasting band from Aberystwyth came down occasionally to a slavera.
But we'd had to pay more, of course. We couldn't always afford him. But once a year he'd come for the old reunion, a slavera grammar school reunion.
And that's where we all went. I think it was about two and six, or something, a ticket.
And how old would you have been then when those dances were taking place?
Sorry?
How old would have you been when you went up to the dances?
I was 17, 18. I was married in 1941.
Sounds like a lot of fun.
1941, yes. Because the dances started, that's right, it should have been 1939.
And of course the rink was closed then. When we turned up one Saturday we'd come down with Mr Griffiths in his car and there was a big notice up.
These premises are closed until further notice. Making them bomb proof or something.
Goodness.
Yeah.
So how did the Sturgenleis change with the coming of World War II?
Well, the boys left, you see, the young boys. That was the trouble. And in the dances, it was very noticeable then.
There were no boys. Hardly any. Only young, too young really for us.
Yes, yes.
And then of course I was married then. And quite a few were married at the time.
Was there a change in the town? Obviously the younger men were out fighting.
Yes.
Was there a general change of...
Yeah, well we used to have these...what do they call them now? Oh, my memory.
There were special...
Dances.
Efforts, yes.
Yes, raising money, is it?
Yes, raising money to send parcels out to them, you know.
Yes.
We used to have those all through the war, really.
Fundraising.
Yes.
And we never thought they'd go and dream of things like that. They were always coming back.
Yes, of course. And with, obviously, Joseph Kimover, the Moser.
Oh, yes.
Were there other emigre residents in the Sturgenleis area at all? That you knew of?
Yes. Dr. Bullets. And there was Dr. Bullets, and he became very popular.
And he died recently, I think, about a year ago, or two years ago.
And Mrs. Bullets, they ran away, actually, from Poland.
They came down to Italy and then came across. They had two children then.
So they lived in the Sturgenleis as well.
Yes. And of course, Joe had to leave because of his health. That's why he left.
Because he loved it there.
The damp climate, is it?
Yes. The climate defeated him. Well, the doctor advised him to go.
And yet, we thought he'd have gone to sunnier climes, you know, like France or Italy or somewhere.
But London they chose anyway.
But did he go to Paris in 1946 on a trip?
Yes.
Do you know much about that?
Only that he, Katriona told us that he'd left to Paris to find out about his parents.
Oh, that was then, was it? Right, it was that time.
Yes, that was then, yes. Sorry, yes.
Did you do taking Wendy's sketching?
Oh, yes. I used to take her, yes.
Oh, yes, please tell. Please tell about that. That sounds like a lovely story.
And she was very, no, she didn't want to go. And I said, well, if I come with you.
Oh, yes, she said, that would be all right, I think. She wasn't sure whether I'd make a difference.
But anyway, we went round Pennebont, over the river, Pennebont, and down to Gyms and round to take scenes in the night.
The lights fell on horses and cabs and buses and cars.
I did one and he approved, and Wendy did that one, and I thought it was very good.
I think that's the one, isn't it?
Yes.
Very good. And she was going to do art at all levels, you see. Then, of course, that was the time.
So did Joseph influence Wendy's work?
Oh, yes. Oh, bigger than people and that, because he was with Roland Braud, you know, the Delbanco Gallery, and very popular.
Can you tell us more about those who visited Joe at his studio?
Oh, so many artists, weren't there? I don't know, particularly. Only the ones I mentioned were Dr. Roland.
And there was another writer, and David Martin, of course, was a writer.
And I think lots of people who we didn't even know, you know, at some times.
So you sometimes get some characters coming down into the town from London and sort of made the place even more colourful than it was.
And Catuina's come for dishes. She didn't have dishes.
Well, when they came, that's right, she didn't have enough dishes.
Or it was wartime and we were all rationed.
And Joe came over and asked if my mother'd lend him some dishes for these people who came from London.
So my mother said, well, my father, it was actually, found a flask, put a towel or something, and got all her best dishes and put them in.
She didn't have any. And, don't bring them back broken, she said to Joe.
Which luckily he didn't, so he was always welcome then after that.
So Catuina was preparing a banquet, was she?
Oh yes.
To impress the London art crowd.
From London anyway.
I don't know what I'm shouting, am I?
No, not at all.
I'm told I shout because I'm hard of hearing.
But as Joseph has a figure around the town at that time.
Oh yes, Joe Bach.
Was it sort of, did he come?
Yes, brilliant.
And he loved that.
He loved to be called Joe Bach.
Did he fit, when he was saved, did he fit in straight away into the house?
Did he fit in straight away into the town?
Yes, I think they did.
Did he take a while to just...
And of course she was a cracker really, wasn't she, from the other sky.
And must have found it a bit difficult settling in to Welsh life.
But yes, I think I've written about all the shops in Ustrad, most of them.
And of course he went every day to get cherries.
Bag of cherries.
I don't know what a pound of cherries is, I imagine.
I think it was something to do with...
It all stemmed from something that happened in Warsaw.
Was it typhus?
Yes, they brought typhus in.
To the ghetto?
To the ghetto.
And apparently, of course, half of them died, he said, but his family survived.
And one day he was walking along and he'd got...
Well, perhaps he didn't have the typhus.
It would have killed him probably, because he was quite young then, about 16.
And he was walking along and he saw this cherry on a wall.
And he picked it up and it was so nice that he became...
A big fan.
Yes, yes.
Did Joe talk much about his past?
Well, he did initially, to my mother and father, particularly.
About his mother, particularly, he was fond of his mother.
He adored his mother.
And, yes, he was very fond of his family.
His heart broke when he came back.
But if I say the word Joseph Herman to you now,
What are the first things that spring to mind?
When I think of Joe?
Yes.
Oh, well, I just see him, actually.
Can you describe his physique?
Yes, well, he wasn't tall.
And he always wore this hat, this black hat and his green cloak.
What was the cloak made of?
Oh, Harris tweed. Oh, it was. Really, yes, good.
Very good material.
And that's how I remember.
And, of course, in summertime he didn't have the cloak.
He just came in this little waistcoat thing.
Brown waistcoat. I remember brown.
And a shirt.
Sort of a check shirt.
And corduroy trousers.
Always corduroy trousers.
Not very clean sometimes. Full of paint.
And my mother said, I wish he'd wash his trousers.
I wish he'd have them cleaned.
And my father said, yes, but think of the good work he's turning out.
Oh, yes.
This was just about...
So Joseph was still around, still in Minister Gernice?
No, this was when in the camera club.
And he came up to me one night in the camera club.
I was there. I attended as often as I could because I was keen on photography.
And my jaw came in and he went right up to me, this finger, and he put it right there.
He said you were pregnant.
I didn't know. You know, you get embarrassed.
I hope nobody had heard.
And I went home and a few days later I found I was.
And I spoke to Mr. Richards, the chemist, about it.
And he said, yes, because this, when you're pregnant, this vein becomes enlarged.
The vein in the eye.
So I didn't know that, of course.
And the jaw did. No, I don't think, perhaps he didn't.
He just had that... Instinct. Yes.
So did he always, did he smoke? Did he smoke a pipe?
No, I don't remember him smoking at all.
No, I don't think he did, no.
And his outfits were always quite simple, but the best, if you had the Harris tweed.
Oh, yes.
And of course, Katriona probably bought it because she bought eight of his paintings, didn't she?
To help him, of course, you know.
Oh, she's lovely.
I think they were well suited, but then something happened and they had to go away.
And she fell ill, I think, and went home.
What was their home like, the studio?
Can you remember what it looked like inside, where he worked?
Oh, where he worked.
Yes, it was, his easel was there, wasn't it?
And he had this big easel and he had the small ones, you know, and all the paint work.
It was a bit messy, actually.
If you were house proud, I don't think you'd put up with it.
But then he turned out such lovely work, everyone appreciated that.
And he was asked to lecture here and there, you know.
Did he lecture at Estragon Nice?
In, well, the Cameraclub first, of course, and then the welfare hall and the church hall.
He gave a lecture there, a few lectures.
And I think were they popular lectures?
Yes, yes, they were all, yes, yes.
And what were the lectures about?
Yes, oh, well, about his work.
And if he was painting something at the time, he'd talk about that.
And they'd ask questions then, what kind of paint he does and brushes and all that.
I went to one in the welfare.
It was, oh, very well supported, that one.
There must have been about 40 people there.
Yes, there was a lot going on at the time.